README.md, before:

﻿# IoT-Gateway-and-Server-Know-How
A collection of know-how and URLs to get started with IoT Gateways and Servers.

A short (4 minutes) and helpful video introduction "What is an IoT Gateway? (SAP EA Explorer - Short Video)" can be found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ObesqWDpEo

**Contents of this page**

<!-- TOC depthFrom:2 depthTo:3 -->

- [Raspberry Pi (RPi) and NodeJS](#raspberry-pi-rpi-and-nodejs)
- [Node-RED](#node-red)
  - [Node-Red in general](#node-red-in-general)
  - [Node-RED-dashboard](#node-red-dashboard)
- [Things Gateway by Mozilla](#things-gateway-by-mozilla)
- [Bluetooth und Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) on embedded Linux devices](#bluetooth-und-bluetooth-low-energy-ble-on-embedded-linux-devices)

<!-- /TOC -->

## Raspberry Pi (RPi) and NodeJS

* w3schools.com: "Node.js and Raspberry Pi" on https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/nodejs_raspberrypi.asp

## Node-RED

### Node-Red in general

* Node-RED home page on https://nodered.org/
  * Getting Started on https://nodered.org/docs/getting-started/
* "Random Nerd Tutorials" about various IoT topics on https://randomnerdtutorials.com
  * "Getting Started with Node-RED on Raspberry Pi"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/getting-started-with-node-red-on-raspberry-pi/
    * Basic infos about node-red
    * Installation in Raspberry Pi (there might be other/simpler ways than shown here)
    * Node-Red IDE Overview
    * A very simple flow with "Inject" and "Debug"
  * "Exporting and Backing Up your Node-RED Nodes"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/exporting-and-backing-up-your-node-red-nodes/
    * simple and short ...
* "Node RED Programming Guide" from Sense Tecnic Systems Inc
  * Homepage on http://noderedguide.com/
  * Eight Lectures about Node-Red
  * Most lectures use "FRED", a cloud service for "Front end for Node-RED", which you may (or may not) use.

### Node-RED-dashboard

* "Random Nerd Tutorials", "Getting Started with Node-RED Dashboard"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/getting-started-with-node-red-dashboard/
    * Installation
    * UI Tabs and Groups
    * Very simple UI with "Room and Garden", but no interaction or business logic


## Things Gateway by Mozilla

* Project Things: https://iot.mozilla.org/
* Things Gateway: https://iot.mozilla.org/gateway/
* Things Framework: https://iot.mozilla.org/things/
* Ben Francis, 2018: How to build your own private smart home with a Raspberry Pi and Mozilla’s Things Gateway
  * https://hacks.mozilla.org/2018/02/how-to-build-your-own-private-smart-home-with-a-raspberry-pi-and-mozillas-things-gateway/


## Bluetooth und Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) on embedded Linux devices

Note: Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) was formerly known as Bluetooth Smart

**List of helpful URLs:**

* Debian Wiki, BluetoothUser:<br>
  https://wiki.debian.org/BluetoothUser
  
* ARch Linux Wiki, Bluetooth:<br> 
  https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Bluetooth
  
* SuperUser: How many devices can be hooked up to one PC Bluetooth adapter at a time?<br>
  https://superuser.com/a/935508

* Raspberry Pi, Raspbian:
  * Bluetooth Commands:<br>
    http://www.raspberry-projects.com/pi/pi-operating-systems/raspbian/bluetooth/bluetooth-commands
    
  * Connect Bluetooth:<br>
    https://www.datenreise.de/en/raspberry-pi-connect-bluetooth/
  
  * Maker.io: Raspberry Pi 3 B and B+ - How to Configure Wi-Fi and Bluetooth<br>
    https://www.digikey.com/en/maker/blogs/raspberry-pi-3---how-to-connect-wi-fi-and-bluetooth
    
  * Raspberry Pi Geek (in German and with many adds): Bluetooth auf dem Raspberry Pi 3 einrichten <br>
    http://www.raspberry-pi-geek.de/Magazin/2016/04/Bluetooth-auf-dem-Raspberry-Pi-3-einrichten
  
  * Raspberry Pi Geek (in English): Setting up Bluetooth on the Raspberry Pi 3<br>
    Includes nice background information<br>
    http://www.raspberry-pi-geek.com/Archive/2016/18/Setting-up-Bluetooth-on-the-Raspberry-Pi-3
    
  * ThePiHut: Bluetooth - Installing and Using Bluetooth on the Raspberry Pi<br>
    https://thepihut.com/blogs/raspberry-pi-tutorials/17841464-bluetooth-installing-and-using-bluetooth-on-the-raspberry-pi

Commit message:

Adding/updating general introduction and TOC.

README.md, after:

﻿# IoT-Gateway-and-Server-Know-How
A collection of know-how and URLs to get started with IoT Gateways and Servers.

A short (4 minutes) and helpful video introduction "What is an IoT Gateway? (SAP EA Explorer - Short Video)" can be found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ObesqWDpEo

**Contents of this page**

<!-- TOC depthFrom:2 depthTo:3 -->

- [Raspberry Pi (RPi) and NodeJS](#raspberry-pi-rpi-and-nodejs)
- [Node-RED](#node-red)
  - [Node-Red in general](#node-red-in-general)
  - [Node-RED-dashboard](#node-red-dashboard)
- [Things Gateway by Mozilla](#things-gateway-by-mozilla)
- [Bluetooth und Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) on embedded Linux devices](#bluetooth-und-bluetooth-low-energy-ble-on-embedded-linux-devices)

<!-- /TOC -->

## Raspberry Pi (RPi) and NodeJS

If you are new to Raspberry Pi (RPi), take a look at the official Raspberry Pi documentation homepage: https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/.

Another good source of introduction for "Node.js and Raspberry Pi" can be found on w3schools.com: https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/nodejs_raspberrypi.asp


## Node-RED

### Node-Red in general

* Node-RED home page on https://nodered.org/
  * Getting Started on https://nodered.org/docs/getting-started/
* "Random Nerd Tutorials" about various IoT topics on https://randomnerdtutorials.com
  * "Getting Started with Node-RED on Raspberry Pi"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/getting-started-with-node-red-on-raspberry-pi/
    * Basic infos about node-red
    * Installation in Raspberry Pi (there might be other/simpler ways than shown here)
    * Node-Red IDE Overview
    * A very simple flow with "Inject" and "Debug"
  * "Exporting and Backing Up your Node-RED Nodes"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/exporting-and-backing-up-your-node-red-nodes/
    * simple and short ...
* "Node RED Programming Guide" from Sense Tecnic Systems Inc
  * Homepage on http://noderedguide.com/
  * Eight Lectures about Node-Red
  * Most lectures use "FRED", a cloud service for "Front end for Node-RED", which you may (or may not) use.

### Node-RED-dashboard

* "Random Nerd Tutorials", "Getting Started with Node-RED Dashboard"
    * https://randomnerdtutorials.com/getting-started-with-node-red-dashboard/
    * Installation
    * UI Tabs and Groups
    * Very simple UI with "Room and Garden", but no interaction or business logic


## Things Gateway by Mozilla

* Project Things: https://iot.mozilla.org/
* Things Gateway: https://iot.mozilla.org/gateway/
* Things Framework: https://iot.mozilla.org/things/
* Ben Francis, 2018: How to build your own private smart home with a Raspberry Pi and Mozilla’s Things Gateway
  * https://hacks.mozilla.org/2018/02/how-to-build-your-own-private-smart-home-with-a-raspberry-pi-and-mozillas-things-gateway/


## Bluetooth und Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) on embedded Linux devices

Note: Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) was formerly known as Bluetooth Smart

**List of helpful URLs:**

* Debian Wiki, BluetoothUser:<br>
  https://wiki.debian.org/BluetoothUser
  
* ARch Linux Wiki, Bluetooth:<br> 
  https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Bluetooth
  
* SuperUser: How many devices can be hooked up to one PC Bluetooth adapter at a time?<br>
  https://superuser.com/a/935508

* Raspberry Pi, Raspbian:
  * Bluetooth Commands:<br>
    http://www.raspberry-projects.com/pi/pi-operating-systems/raspbian/bluetooth/bluetooth-commands
    
  * Connect Bluetooth:<br>
    https://www.datenreise.de/en/raspberry-pi-connect-bluetooth/
  
  * Maker.io: Raspberry Pi 3 B and B+ - How to Configure Wi-Fi and Bluetooth<br>
    https://www.digikey.com/en/maker/blogs/raspberry-pi-3---how-to-connect-wi-fi-and-bluetooth
    
  * Raspberry Pi Geek (in German and with many adds): Bluetooth auf dem Raspberry Pi 3 einrichten <br>
    http://www.raspberry-pi-geek.de/Magazin/2016/04/Bluetooth-auf-dem-Raspberry-Pi-3-einrichten
  
  * Raspberry Pi Geek (in English): Setting up Bluetooth on the Raspberry Pi 3<br>
    Includes nice background information<br>
    http://www.raspberry-pi-geek.com/Archive/2016/18/Setting-up-Bluetooth-on-the-Raspberry-Pi-3
    
  * ThePiHut: Bluetooth - Installing and Using Bluetooth on the Raspberry Pi<br>
    https://thepihut.com/blogs/raspberry-pi-tutorials/17841464-bluetooth-installing-and-using-bluetooth-on-the-raspberry-pi
